# Northanger Abbey at the Movies

The 1986 film of Northanger Abbey forces us to realize anew the importance of six qualities of Jane Austen's novel. 

These qualities are: 

1. the importance of the self-conscious narrator to our enjoyment of the novel;
2. the lack of significant action in the novel;
3. the lack of Gothic texture in Catherine’s everyday experience;
4. the comic disparity between Catherine’s social world and her imaginative transformation of it;
5. the carefully unified action of the novel, which means that the Thorpes and their Bath fabrications are present when Catherine is at Northanger Abbey;
6. and Jane Austen’s situation of the action within the heroine’s mind and in her growing ability to think and choose.

These six aspects of Northanger Abbey are hardly new discoveries of mine (and if they are, the credit of a wild imagination will at least be all my own). The TV adaptation, however, forces us to realize anew how central they are to the novel.

### Plot Summary

Catherine, a naive seventeen-year-old in eighteenth-century England, leaves her quiet home in the country to visit Bath with neighbors. There she befriends another girl and reads novels with her; she goes out for a carriage ride with the friend’s brother; she meets the hero at a dance, dances with him again at a second ball, and then goes for a walk with him and his sister. She then visits the hero’s father’s estate, Northanger Abbey; there she secretly visits his dead mother’s bedroom and is very embarrassed when caught doing so by the hero. Some days later she is suddenly forced to cut her visit short by the hero’s tyrannical father, who has discovered that she is much poorer than he had thought. This unkind eviction brings about a proposal from the hero, and all ends happily.

### My first point, the importance of the narrator to our experience of  Northanger Abbey,  is an aspect of the novel that any film adaptation will have to sacrifice.

This very prominent narrator tells us a story that has virtually no striking external action. 

### **The absence of external action**

Film is a medium that must have significant action, yet, compared to Jane Austen’s other novels, Northanger Abbey lacks visual possibilities.

### **The prosaic and very un-Gothic texture of Catherine’s experience**

The adapters of *Northanger Abbey* choose to confront the novel’s lack of external action by two bold moves. One is promising, at least in its possibilities, and follows the novel’s lead: they show Catherine compensating for, and enlivening, her ordinary life by vividly imagined, if banal, Gothic fantasies. The other, though, is disastrous. The film makes Catherine’s social world much more Gothic, much more creepy and bizarre, than it is in the novel.

In short, the Catherine of the adaptation hardly needs to leap very far when she sees the General as a Gothic villain.

### The novel bases its appeal on the transforming power of Catherine’s imagination—that is, on the comic contrast between her social world and her novel-derived imaginings of it.

Whereas the Catherine of the novel contemplates the General’s demeanor as he paces the drawing room and decides, “It was the air and attitude of a Montoni!” (187), no such comic contrast exists in the film. The adaptation is remarkably unfunny. In fact, the film makes Henry Tilney seem a great deal more smug, more priggish, more lacking in sympathy and comic awareness when he rebukes Catherine. His speech in the novel ends with the words, “‘Dearest Miss Morland, what ideas have you been admitting?’” (198), whereas in the adaptation, he ends with a more rhetorical and directive question, “My dear Miss Morland, has reading one silly novel unbalanced your judgment so completely?” Austen’s Henry Tilney, and indeed the author of *Northanger Abbey* herself, has a much more divided and less dismissive view of *The Mysteries of Udolpho*. The Henry of the adaptation does just what the novel’s Henry does not: he tells the heroine what to think, rather than asking her to think for herself

### The carefully unified action of the novel

Austen’s novel has an elegant unity of structure: Northanger Abbey is not entirely a separate place from Bath, since the Abbey is an embodiment of delusions generated by the Thorpes in Bath: Isabella has infected Catherine’s imagination by introducing her to Radcliffe’s novel, and John Thorpe’s self-aggrandizing exaggerations of Catherine’s wealth have prompted General Tilney to invite her there. It might seem that a film adaptation of Austen’s novel can be tightly unified by its use of fantasy: in the 1986 version, Catherine Morland has Gothic daydreams even before she goes to Bath, and they continue right through to the climactic events at Northanger Abbey. In fact, Marilyn Roberts argues in an essay on the 1986 adaptation that it has a structural advantage over Jane Austen’s novel: “By depicting Catherine as Udolpho obsessed from the start, Wadey prepares the viewer for Catherine’s response to the Abbey and her fears that the General is another Montoni” (23). It is true that one satisfying aspect of the adaptation is that, as Catherine comes to know the General, the face of the cruel torturer in her recurrent fantasy becomes more and more evidently that of General Tilney.

However, Austen’s novel makes quite a different use of Catherine’s Udolpho- based fantasies. In the novel it is clear that Catherine has not read The Mysteries of Udolpho,or any other Gothic novels, till she meets Isabella—the latter says to her, “‘It is so odd to me, that you should never have read Udolpho before’” (41)—and the result is that Catherine’s vision at the Abbey of the General as a reincarnation of that novel’s villain is Isabella acting on Catherine by proxy.

The film smooths over Isabella’s devious motive in befriending Catherine by having James Morland introduce Catherine to Isabella after James comes to Bath. This connection between Isabella’s devious and flattering fictions of friendship and Catherine’s delusions about the General is underlined by the fact that Catherine, once she has renounced her vision of General Tilney as another Montoni, has no trouble seeing that the smarmy letter she receives at the Abbey from Isabella, seeking Catherine’s help in bringing James back to her, is a tissue of lies. There is no such letter in the film.

In the same way, the novel makes fatuous John Thorpe responsible for both the General’s painfully obvious pursuit of Catherine and his abrupt dismissal of her: just as Thorpe had exaggerated her wealth at Bath when he thought he and his sister would both be marrying into the Morland family, so, when he meets the General in London, now speaking as a rejected suitor and someone disgraced by his sister’s jilting of James Morland, he asserts that the Morlands are poor and disreputable: “a necessitous family; numerous too almost beyond example… a forward, bragging, scheming race” (246). However, the film obscures this neat logic in events: in the novel, General Tilney behaves quite differently to Catherine after Thorpe has told him of her wealth, whereas in the film the General pursues Catherine as soon as he meets her. In the adaptation, the General has heard of Catherine’s wealth (presumably from the Marchioness) before Thorpe approaches him at the ball with news of Miss Morland, and what had been in the novel his creakingly gallant praise of the elasticity of Catherine’s walk the day after Thorpe has been seen talking earnestly with the General at the theatre (95,103) occurs in the film within forty-five seconds of his meeting her—and is accompanied by a leer and preceded by a close inspection from a distance of three feet. Similarly, in the film the General explodes in anger and expels Catherine after receiving a letter from the Marchioness informing him that the Morlands are now thought in Bath to be not nearly as wealthy as had been generally believed. The close ties between the Thorpes and Northanger Abbey have virtually disappeared in the film.

### the film adaptation highlights another distinctive aspect of Austen’s novel: Jane Austen situates the point of view from which the story unfolds within the heroine’s mind.

Our experience of the film is thereby much more fragmented and disjointed than of the novel, especially when such added bits of dialogue seem out of tune with the rest of the script (an example is the two Tilney brothers chaffing each other and taking snuff, or a vignette in which the Marchioness passes on salacious gossip to the General, or indeed the plot-resolving scene in the film, during which Henry rebels against his father and asserts his disinterested love of Catherine—while the General trains a hawk and comes to realize that Catherine’s fortune is attractive enough, after all).

**Jane Austen uses her chosen vantage point to trace the growth of the heroine’s ability to think for herself and make meaningful choices. The Catherine of the film adaptation does not really get the chance to think, let alone choose.**

The film’s Catherine, unlike the novel’s heroine, does not discuss with Eleanor and then decide the vexed question of whether it would be proper for her to write Eleanor once she returns home (228-29), nor does she write that difficult letter that she knows will be read by Henry as well as Eleanor (235-36).

### **The differences between Jane Austen’s novel and the 1986 film become especially clear if we compare the conclusions of the two works.**

The film moves rapidly to a campily romantic finale.

The scene is strange: crudely romantic, yet also arch in its use of film cliché.

They say a picture is worth a thousand words, but not if the picture is unremarkable and the words are Jane Austen’s. The witty, obtrusive “contriver” dominates the novel’s final pages: there is no dialogue in the last two chapters of the novel. At the novel’s end, instead of romantic rescue and embrace we find sentences such as the following: “The anxiety, which in this state of their attachment must be the portion of Henry and Catherine, and of all who loved either, as to its final event, can hardly extend to the bosom of my readers, who will see in the tell-tale compression of the pages before them, that we are all hastening together to perfect felicity” (250). Rather than ending conclusively, the novel’s final sentence combines narrative closure with playful ambiguities of significance and tone:


### **Conclusion**

This paper is not meant to be, and I hope it is not, adaptationbashing. The film adaptations of Jane Austen’s novels provide great pleasure: I have seen every one of the film and TV adaptations and look forward to seeing future ones, no matter how shocking they may be. My argument, however, has been that the film version of a Jane Austen novel, in this case the 1986 adaptation of Northanger Abbey, **brings into clearer focus the distinctive qualities of its original.**

My argument, however, has been that the film version of a Jane Austen novel, in this case the 1986 adaptation of **Northanger Abbey, **brings into clearer focus the distinctive qualities of its original. The viewer of adaptations of Jane Austen’s novels is in much the same position as Jane Austen herself when she visited three exhibitions of paintings in London in May 1813, four months after Pride and Prejudice was published: “I had great amusement among the Pictures,” she wrote to Cassandra, but “there was nothing like Mrs D. at either [exhibition]….I can only imagine that Mr D. prizes any Picture of her too much to like it should be exposed to the public eye.—I can imagine he wd have that sort of feeling—that mixture of Love, Pride & Delicacy” (24 May 1813). Like Jane Austen at the spring exhibitions, we will not find a close likeness of her heroine among the pictures, but we will discover more about the novel that the heroine inhabits.

# Possible Outline

电影大致介绍：
